# Testing a rapid assessment approach for measuring ecosystem services in urban green alleys 

Marie C Dade, Isabella C Richmond, Jesse T Rieb, Erin Crockett, Kayleigh Hutt-Taylor, Serena Sinno, Karina Benessaiah, Catherine Destrempes, Jackie Hamilton, Fatemeh Izadi, L. Emily Kroft, Lingshan Li, Michael Paulauskas, Klara J Winkler, Elena M Bennett, Carly D Ziter

## Abstract 
Urban green infrastructure – the network of greenspaces across cities – can improve urban sustainability due to the ecosystem services it provides. Because of this, cities are increasingly redeveloping underused alleys into green infrastructure to improve ecosystem service supply. But it remains unclear if these green alleys are delivering on the promise of supplying these much needed ecosystem services. The indicators usually used to measure ecosystem service supply within green infrastructure may not be suitable for green alleys because of their unique structure, features, and level of community engagement. Here we develop and test a rapid assessment approach to evaluate ecosystem service supply appropriate for use by community members and practitioners, using a green alley network in Montréal (Canada) as a case study. We collected data on green alley vegetation structure, aesthetic features and the capacity of four ecosystem services (food provision, habitat for pollinators, anthropogenic noise and air temperature). We modelled the relationships between vegetation structure, aesthetics, and ecosystem services, to determine if these rapidly assessed features of green alleys are appropriate indicators to evaluate ecosystem service supply. Our results show that a rapidly assessed measure of vegetative ground cover is strongly associated with habitat for pollinators, highlighting potential for vegetative ground cover as an indicator for this service. No aesthetic features were associated with the four ecosystem services, suggesting that further research is required to untangle these complex relationships. Alley vegetation measured via rapid assessment was not associated with air temperature regulation or anthropogenic noise regulation, contrasting the findings of previous studies. Our research provides a starting point for developing indicators of ecosystem service capacity that are tailored specifically to the unique structure and features of green alleys, a crucial step in testing the efficacy of this increasingly popular sustainable development strategy. 

## Repository Use 
This repository is built using a [`{targets}`](https://books.ropensci.org/targets/) workflow. To run the analysis from this paper, clone this repository, run `install.packages('renv')` and then install all dependencies using `renv::restore()` . After successfully installing packages, run `targets::tar_make()` in the console to run the entire workflow. All pieces of the workflow are defined in the files found in the script/ folder. To load any individual step of the workflow to your environment, use `targets::tar_load(NAME)`. 

For any questions related to code, data, or workflow please email isabella.richmond@mail.concordia.ca
